=head1 NAME

SquidAnalyzer - Squid access log report generation tool


=head1 DESCRIPTION

SquidAnalyzer parse native access log format of the Squid proxy and
generate general statistics about hits, bytes, users, networks, top
url and top second level domain.

Statistic reports are oriented to user and bandwidth control, this
is not a pure cache statistics generator. SquidAnalyzer use flat
files to store data and don't need any SQL, SQL Lite or Berkeley
databases.

This analyzer is incremental so it should be run in a daily cron.
Take care if you have rotate log enable to run it before rotation
is done.

=head1 REQUIREMENT

Nothing is required than a modern perl version 5.8 or higher. Graphics
are based on the Flotr2 Javascript library so they are drawn at your
browser side without extra installation required.

=head1 INSTALLATION

=head2 Generic install

If you want the package to be intalled into the Perl distribution just
do the following:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make install

Follow the instruction given at the end of install. With this default install
everything configurable will be installed under /etc/squidanalyzer. The Perl
library SquidAnalyzer.pm will be installed under your site_perl directory and
the squid-analyzer Perl script will be copied under /usr/local/bin.

The default output directory for html reports will be /var/www/squidanalyzer/.

On FreeBSD, if make install is freezing and you have the following messages:

	FreeBSD: Registering installation in the package database
	FreeBSD: Cannot determine short module description
	FreeBSD: Cannot determine module description

please proceed as follow:

	perl Makefile.PL INSTALLDIRS=site
	make
	make install

as the issue is related to an install into the default Perl vendor installdirs
it will then use Perl site installdirs.

=head2 Custom install

You can create your fully customized SquidAnalyzer installation by using the
Makefile.PL Perl script. Here is a sample:

	perl Makefile.PL \
		LOGFILE=/var/log/squid3/access.log \
		BINDIR=/usr/bin \
		CONFDIR=/etc \
		HTMLDIR=/var/www/squidreport \
		BASEURL=/squidreport \
		MANDIR=/usr/man/man3 \
		DOCDIR=/usr/share/doc/squidanalyzer

If you want to build a distro package, there are two other options that you may use. The QUIET option is to tell to Makefile.PL to not show the default post install README. The DESTDIR is to create and install all files in a package build base directory. For example for Fedora RPM, thing may look like that:

	# Make Perl and SendmailAnalyzer distrib files
	%{__perl} Makefile.PL \
	    INSTALLDIRS=vendor \
	    QUIET=1 \
	    LOGFILE=/var/log/squid/access.log \
	    BINDIR=%{_bindir} \
	    CONFDIR=%{_sysconfdir} \
	    BASEDIR=%{_localstatedir}/lib/%{uname} \
	    HTMLDIR=%{webdir} \
	    MANDIR=%{_mandir}/man3 \
	    DOCDIR=%{_docdir}/%{uname}-%{version} \
	    DESTDIR=%{buildroot} < /dev/null

See spec file in packaging/RPM for full RPM build script. 

=head2 Local install

You can also have a custom installation. Just copy the SquidAnalyzer.pm and the
squid-analyzer perl script into a directory, copy and modify the configuration
file and run the script from here with the -c option.

Then copy files sorttable.js, squidanalyzer.css and logo-squidanalyzer.png into
the output directory.

=head2 Post installation

1. Modify your httpd.conf to allow access to HTML output like follow:

        Alias /squidreport /var/www/squidanalyzer
        <Directory /var/www/squidanalyzer>
            Options -Indexes FollowSymLinks MultiViews
            AllowOverride None
            Order deny,allow
            Deny from all
            Allow from 127.0.0.1
        </Directory>

2. If necessary, give additional host access to SquidAnalyzer in httpd.conf.
Restart and ensure that httpd is running.

3. Browse to http://my.host.dom/squidreport/ to ensure that things are working
properly.

4. Setup a cronjob to run squid-analyzer daily or more often:

     # SquidAnalyzer log reporting daily
     0 2 * * * /usr/local/bin/squid-analyzer > /dev/null 2>&1

or run it manually. For more information, see README file.

You can use network name instead of network ip addresses by using the
network-aliases file. Also if you don't have authentication enable and
want to replace client ip addresses by some know user or computer you
can use the user-aliases file to do so. 

See the file squidanalyzer.conf to customized your output statistics and
match your network and file system configuration.

=head1 USAGE

SquidAnalyzer can be run manually or by cron job using the squid-analyzer Perl
script. Here are authorized usage:

    Usage: squid-analyzer [ -c squidanalyzer.conf ] [-l logfile]

	-c | --configfile filename : path to the SquidAnalyzer configuration file.
				     By default: /etc/squidanalyzer.conf
	-b | --build_date date     : set the day to be rebuilt, format: yyyy-mm-dd,
				     yyyy-mm or yyyy. Used with -r or --rebuild.
	-d | --debug               : show debug informations.
	-h | --help                : show this message and exit.
	-l | --logfile filename    : path to the Squid logfile to parse.
				     By default: /var/log/squid/access.log
	-p | --preserve number     : used to set the statistic obsolescence in
				     number of month. Older stats will be removed.
	-r | --rebuild             : use this option to rebuild all html and graphs
				     output from all data files.
	-v | version               : show version and exit.
	--no-year-stat             : disable years statistics, reports will
				     start from month level only.


There is special options like --rebuild that force SquidAnalyzer to rebuild all
HTML reports, useful after an new feature or a bug fix. If you want to limit the
rebuild to a single day, a single month or year, you can use the --build_date
option by specifying the date part to rebuild, format: yyyy-mm-dd, yyyy-mm or yyyy.

The --preserve option should be used if you want to rotate your statistics and
data. The value is the number of months to keep, older reports and data will be
removed from the filesystem. Useful to preserve space, for example:

	squid-analyzer -p 6 -c /etc/squidanalyzer/squidanalyzer.conf

will only preserve six month of statistics from the last run of squidanalyzer.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

Unless previous version customization of SquidAnalyzer is now
done by a single configuration file squidanalyzer.conf.

Here follow the configuration directives used by Squid Analyzer.

=over 4

=item Output output_directory

Where SquidAnalyzer should dump all HTML, data and images files.
You should give a path that can be read by a Web browser.

=item WebUrl

The URL of the SquidAnalyzer javascript, HTML and images files.
Default: /squidreport

=item LogFile squid_access_log_file

Set the path to the Squid log file.

=item UseClientDNSName        0

If you want to use DNS name instead of client Ip address as username enable
this directive. When you don't have authentication, the username is set to
the client ip address, this allow you to use the DNS name instead.
Note that you must have a working DNS resolution and that it can really slow
down the generation of reports.

=item DNSLookupTimeout        1

If you have enabled UseClientDNSName and have lot of ip addresses that do not
resolve you may want to increase the DNS lookup timeout. By default SquidAnalyzer
will stop to lookup a DNS name after one second.

=item NetworkAlias network-aliases_file

Set path to the file containing network alias name. Network are
show as Ip addresses so if you want to display name instead
create a file with this format:

    LOCATION_NAME IP_NETWORK_ADDRESS

Separator must be a tabulation.

You can use regex to match and group some network addresses. See
network-aliases file for examples.

=item UserAlias user-aliases_file

Set path to the file containing user alias name. If you don't have
auth_proxy enable users are seen as ip addresses. So if you want to
show username or computer name instead, create a file with this format:

    FULL_USERNAME IP_ADDRESS

If you have auth_proxy enable but want to replace login name by full
user name for example, create a file with this format:

    FULL_USERNAME LOGIN_NAME

Separator for both must be a tabulation.

You can use regex to match and group some user login or ip addresses. See
user-aliases file for examples.

You can also replace default ip address by his DNS name by enabling
directive 'UseClientDNSName'.

=item AnonymizeLogin  0

Set this to 1 if you want to anonymize all user login. The username
will be replaced by an unique id that change at each squid-analyzer
run. Default disable.

=item OrderNetwork bytes|hits|duration

=item OrderUser bytes|hits|duration

=item OrderUrl bytes|hits|duration

Used to set how SquidAnalyzer sort Network, User and User detailed Urls
reports screen. Value can be: bytes, hits or duration. Default is bytes.
Note that OrderUrl is limited to User detailed Urls reports and does not
apply to Top Url and Top domain report where there is three reports each
already ordered.

=item OrderMime bytes|hits

Used to set how SquidAnalyzer sort Mime types report screen
Value can be: bytes or hits. Default is bytes.

=item UrlReport 0|1

Should SquidAnalyzer display user details. This will show all
URL read by user. Take care to have enougth space disk for large
user. Default is 0, no url detail report.

=item QuietMode 0|1

Run in quiet mode for batch processing or print debug information.
Default is 0, verbose mode.

=item CostPrice price/Mb

Used to set a cost of the bandwith per Mb. If you want to generate
invoice per Mb for bandwith traffic this can help you. Value 0 mean
no cost, this is the default value, the "Cost" column is not displayed

=item Currency currency_abreviation

Used to set the currency of the bandwith cost. Preferably the html
special character. Default is &euro;

=item TopNumber number

Used to set the number of top url and second level domain to show.
Default is top 100.

=item TopUrlUser
Use this directive to show the top N users that look at an URL or a domain.
Set it to 0 to disable this feature. Default is top 10.

=item Exclude exclusion_file

Used to set client ip addresses, network addresses, auth login or
uri to exclude from report.

You can define one by line exclusion by specifying first the type of the
exclusion (USER, CLIENT or URI) and a space separated list of valid regex.

You can also use the NETWORK type to define network address with netmask
using the CIDR notation: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx/n

See example bellow:

	NETWORK        192.168.1.0/24 10.10.0.0/16
	CLIENT         192\.168\.1\.2 
	CLIENT         10\.169\.1\.\d+ 192\.168\.10\..*
	USER           myloginstr
	USER           guestlogin\d+ guestdemo
	URI            http:\/\/myinternetdomain.dom.*
	URI            .*\.webmail\.com\/.*\/login\.php.*

you can have multiple line of the same exclusion type.

=item Lang language_file

Used to set the translation file to be used. Value must be set to
a file containing all string translated. See the lang directory
for translation files. Default is defined internally in English.

=item DateFormat

Date format used to display date (year = %y, month = %m and day = %d)
You can also use %M to replace month by its 3 letters abbreviation.
Default: %y-%m-%d

=item SiblingHit

Adds peer cache hit (CD_SIBLING_HIT) to be taken has local cache hit.
Enabled by default, you must disabled it if you don't want to report
peer cache hit onto your stats.

=item TransfertUnit

Allow to change the default unit used to display transfert size. Default
is BYTES, other possible values are KB, MB and GB.

=item MinPie

Minimum percentage of data in pie's graphs to not be placed in the others
item. Lower values will be summarized into the others item.

=item Locale

Set this to your locale to display generated date in your language. Default
is to use the current locale of the system. If you want date in German for
example, set it to de_DE.

	Rapport genere le mardi 11 decembre 2012, 15:13:09 (UTC+0100).

with a Locale set to fr_FR.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Gilles DAROLD <gilles@darold.net>


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2001-2013 Gilles DAROLD
    
This package is free software and published under the GPL v3 or above
license.

